# Lab 2 - Azure Functions in Visual Studio 2017

In this lab you will build your first two Azure Functions in Visual Studio. The first t

Goals for this lab: 
- [](#1)
- [](#2)
- [](#3)

## <a name="1"></a>1. Create a Function App in Visual Studio 2017

Open Visual Studio 2017 and create a new project for a Function App. You should have the Azure workload as part of the Visual Studio installation for the project type to appear. If it does not show up, run the Visual Studio Installer and select the Azure workload.

Pick a name for your solution and project, something like ```FunctionsWorkshop2018```. Select ```Azure Functions v2 Preview (.NET Standard)``` from the dropdown and the ```Http trigger``` from the available function triggers. Leave all the rest as default.

Your new project will contain several items. Have a look at what is included, and how this compares to the function created in the portal. What is similar and what is different?

Change the name of the function ```Function1``` to ```DumpHeadersFunction```. Where do you need to make changes for this? Implement the function with the following code.

```
log.Info("C# HTTP trigger function processed a request.");
StringBuilder builder = new StringBuilder();
foreach (var header in request.Headers)
{
    builder.AppendFormat("{0}='{1}',", header.Key, String.Concat(header.Value));
}

return new OkObjectResult(builder.ToString());
```

Build your solution and check if it compiles correctly. Run the solution to see if it works as expected. Notice how Visual Studio starts your Function App locally using the Azure Functions Command-Line Interface tooling.

Navigate to the URL listed at the bottom of the console window and verify the output.

## <a name="2"></a>2. Executing HTTP trigger based functions

Create another function of type ```Http trigger``` and name it ```HighScoreFunction```. This function will use some different features of the HTTP trigger.

Change the signature of your function to be 
```
public static async Task<IActionResult> Run(
  [HttpTrigger(AuthorizationLevel.Function, "post", Route = "HighScores/player/{nickname}")] HttpRequest req,
    string nickname, // from route parameter in request URL
    ILogger log)
```
Take a moment to analyze this Run method. Notice how it is an async method and has more elaborate definition of the ```HttpTriggerAttribute```. What do the individual arguments of the attribute imply? Also notice the ```Route``` argument and how the placeholder ```{nickname}``` matches the ```nickname``` function parameter.

Implement the body of the function with this code.
```
log.LogInformation("C# HTTP trigger function processed a request.");

// Fetching score text from body
string score = await new StreamReader(req.Body).ReadToEndAsync();

return int.TryParse(score, out int points) && !String.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(nickname) 
    ? (ActionResult)new OkObjectResult($"{nickname} achieved a score of {points}!") 
    : new BadRequestObjectResult($"Received invalid nickname and/or score!");
```

Build your solution and run it again. You should see output appear in the console window that indicates that 2 functions are running now.

Try to navigate to the new high score function. Does it work? If not, why not? What do you need to do to fix this?

You might have figured out that the browser can only perform normal GET requests from the address bar. For a POST request we need additional tooling to help you sending the proper request.

Open the Postman tool and construct a correct request you want to send. It should be an URL of this form: ```http://localhost:7071/HighScores/player/LX360``` where LX360 can be your own playername (pick a cool gamer nick if you change it). Change the HTTP verb to POST and define a body that contains a number value, e.g. 1337 or 42.
Send the request and find out if it works now. Check the console window for result or error output.

## <a name="3"></a>3. Binding functions to queues and blobs

Let's build a new function that will be triggered from a message in a storage queue, creates an QR code image based on the contents of the message and stores it in blob storage. Sounds like a lot of code will be needed? Find out quickly.

Add another function named ```QRCodeGeneratorFunction``` and pick the ```Queue trigger``` type function. Set the connection string to ```azurefunctions-queues``` and name the queue itself ```azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests```. 

Change the signature of the functions to be 
```
public static async Task Run([QueueTrigger("azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests", 
  Connection = "azurefunctions-queues")]string imageText,
  int dequeueCount,
  [Blob("azurefunctions-qrcode-images/{rand-guid}", FileAccess.ReadWrite, Connection = "azurefunctions-blobs")] CloudBlockBlob blob,
  TraceWriter log)
```
Again, take a longer look at each of the arguments in the two attributes ```QueueTrigger``` and ```Blob```. Pay attention to the argument ```imageText```, the ```dequeueCount``` and the ```{randguid}``` token.

To generate the QR code you will use a NuGet package named ```QRCoder```. Add this package to your project.

Implement the function with this code:
```
log.Info($"C# Queue trigger function processed: {imageText}");

QRCodeGenerator generator = new QRCodeGenerator();
QRCodeData data = generator.CreateQrCode(imageText, QRCodeGenerator.ECCLevel.H);
QRCode code = new QRCode(data);

using (var stream = await blob.OpenWriteAsync())
{
    Bitmap bitmap = code.GetGraphic(20, Color.Black, Color.White, true);
    bitmap.Save(stream, ImageFormat.Png);
}

```
Notice how the azure function bindings will take care of connecting to the respective resources like the storage queue and blob storage.