docs/Lab2-VS2017.md, before:

# Lab 2 - Azure Functions in Visual Studio 2017

In this lab, you will build four Azure Functions in Visual Studio 2017. The first two are triggered by HTTP requests. The next two functions will use different types of triggers and bindings to Azure storage queues and blobs. At the end, you may have time to experiment with even more functions.

Goals for this lab: 
- [Create a Function App in Visual Studio 2017](#1)
- [Executing HTTP trigger based functions](#2)
- [Binding functions to queues and blobs](#3)
- [Advanced bindings](#4)

## <a name="1"></a>1. Create a Function App in Visual Studio 2017

Open Visual Studio 2017 and create a new project for a Function App. You should have the Azure workload as part of the Visual Studio installation for the project type to appear. If it does not show up, run the Visual Studio Installer and select the Azure workload.

![File New Project](Images/FileNewProject.png)

Pick a name for your solution and project, something like ```FunctionsWorkshop2018```. Select ```Azure Functions v2 Preview (.NET Standard)``` from the drop-down and the ```Http trigger``` from the available function triggers. Leave all the rest as default.

![New Function VS2017](Images/NewFunctionVS2017.png)

Your new project will contain several items. Have a look at what is included, and how this compares to the function created in the portal. What is similar and what is different?

Change the name of the function ```Function1``` to ```DumpHeadersFunction```. Where do you need to make changes for this? Implement the function with the following code.

```
log.Info("C# HTTP trigger function processed a request.");
StringBuilder builder = new StringBuilder();
foreach (var header in req.Headers)
{
    builder.AppendFormat("{0}='{1}',", header.Key, String.Concat(header.Value));
}

return new OkObjectResult(builder.ToString());
```

Build your solution and check if it compiles correctly. Run the solution to see if it works as expected. Notice how Visual Studio starts your Function App locally using the Azure Functions Command-Line Interface tooling.

Navigate to the URL listed at the bottom of the console window and verify the output.

Next, click ```Show all files``` in the Solution Explorer of Visual Studio and inspect the contents of the ```bin\Debug\netstandard2.0``` folder.  

Finally, locate the ```function.json``` file for your function and look at the contents. Compare it to the JSON file from the Azure portal. Try and find the origin of the metadata inside the ```function.json``` file.


## <a name="2"></a>2. Executing HTTP trigger based functions

Create another function of type ```Http trigger``` and name it ```HighScoreFunction```. This function will use some different features of the HTTP trigger.

Change the signature of your function to be 
```
public static async Task<IActionResult> Run(
  [HttpTrigger(AuthorizationLevel.Anonymous, "post", Route = "HighScores/player/{nickname}")] HttpRequest req,
    string nickname, // from route parameter in request URL
    ILogger log)
```
Take a moment to analyze this Run method. Notice how it is an async method and has more elaborate definition of the ```HttpTriggerAttribute```. What do the individual arguments of the attribute imply? Also, notice the ```Route``` argument and how the placeholder ```{nickname}``` matches the ```nickname``` function parameter.

Implement the body of the function with this code.
```
log.LogInformation("C# HTTP trigger function processed a request.");

// Fetching score text from body
string score = await new StreamReader(req.Body).ReadToEndAsync();

return int.TryParse(score, out int points) && !String.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(nickname) 
    ? (ActionResult)new OkObjectResult($"{nickname} achieved a score of {points}!") 
    : new BadRequestObjectResult($"Received invalid nickname and/or score!");
```

Build your solution and run it again. You should see output appear in the console window that indicates that 2 functions are running now.

Try to navigate to the new high score function. Does it work? If not, why not? What do you need to do to fix this?

You might have figured out that the browser can only perform normal GET requests from the address bar. For a POST request we need additional tooling to help you sending the proper request.

Open the Postman tool and construct a correct request you want to send. It should be an URL of this form: ```http://localhost:7071/HighScores/player/LX360``` where LX360 can be your own player name (pick a cool gamer nick if you change it). Change the HTTP verb to POST and define a body that contains a number value, e.g. 1337 or 42.
Send the request and find out if it works now. Check the console window for result or error output.

## <a name="3"></a>3. Binding functions to queues and blobs

Let's build a new function that will be triggered from a message in a storage queue, creates an QR code image based on the contents of the message and stores it in blob storage. Sounds like a lot of code will be needed? Find out quickly.

Add another function named ```QRCodeGeneratorFunction``` and pick the ```Queue trigger``` type function. Set the connection string to ```azurefunctions-queues``` and name the queue itself ```azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests```. 

Change the signature of the functions to be 
```
public static async Task Run([QueueTrigger("azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests", 
  Connection = "azurefunctions-queues")]string imageText,
  int dequeueCount,
  [Blob("azurefunctions-qrcode-images/{rand-guid}", FileAccess.ReadWrite, Connection = "azurefunctions-blobs")] CloudBlockBlob blob,
  TraceWriter log)
```
Again, take a longer look at each of the arguments in the two attributes ```QueueTrigger``` and ```Blob```. Pay attention to the argument ```imageText```, the ```dequeueCount``` and the ```{randguid}``` token.

To generate the QR code you will use a NuGet package named ```QRCoder```. Add this package to your project.

Implement the function with this code:
```
log.Info($"C# Queue trigger function processed: {imageText}");

QRCodeGenerator generator = new QRCodeGenerator();
QRCodeData data = generator.CreateQrCode(imageText, QRCodeGenerator.ECCLevel.H);
QRCode code = new QRCode(data);

using (var stream = await blob.OpenWriteAsync())
{
    Bitmap bitmap = code.GetGraphic(20, Color.Black, Color.White, true);
    bitmap.Save(stream, ImageFormat.Png);
}

```
Notice how the azure function bindings will take care of connecting to the respective resources like the storage queue and blob storage.

Run the application and check that there are now three functions. You can execute the queue-triggered function by placing a message in the ```azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests``` queue. For this, start the Azure Storage Explorer and open the node on the left for ```(Local and attached) -> Storage accounts -> (Development) -> Queues```. Use the + sign to create a new message with the URL of your favorite website. Store the message and watch what happens. You might have to click Refresh and it can take up to a minute for the message to disappear.
If all went well, you should find a new guid entry in the blob storage ```azurefunctions-qrcode-images```. Open it to see if it contains your QR code. In the case that it doesn't work, use Visual Studio for debugging. The console window might also contain some logging information to help diagnose the error.

## <a name="4"></a>4. Advanced bindings

In the final example for now, you will create a function that imports the contents of a queue message. The message contains JSON content with a list of high scores. The values need to be imported into an Azure Storage table.

Create your fourth function, choose the Queue trigger type and name it ```ImportHighScoreFunction```. The connection string should be ```azurefunctions-queues``` again, but the name of the queue ```azurefunctions-import```. 

Add code to your solution for two POCO classes. The first named ```HighScoreEntry``` is used to deserialize the JSON content of the :

| Type | Property Name |
| --- | --- |
| string | Game |
| string | NickName|
| int | Score |

and

```HighScoreTableItem```:

| Type | Property Name |
| --- | --- |
| string | PartitionKey |
| string | RowKey |
| string | Nickname |
| int | Score |


Implement the function to have the following code:
```
log.Info("C# Queue trigger function processed");

foreach (HighScoreEntry entry in entries)
{
    await table.AddAsync(new HighScoreTableItem()
    {
        PartitionKey = entry.Game,
        RowKey = Guid.NewGuid().ToString(),
        Nickname = entry.Nickname,
        Score = entry.Score
    });
}
```

Try out this new function by creating a queue for the message and pasting some JSON in a message containing this data:
```
[
  {
    "Game": "Pacman",
    "Nickname": "LX360",
    "Score": 1337
  },
  {
    "Game": "Space Invaders",
    "Nickname": "MadMax",
    "Score": 123456
  },
  {
    "Game": "Donkey Kong",
    "Nickname": "Wes Copeland",
    "Score": 1218000
  }
]
```

Make sure everything works correctly and fix any errors that may occur.

## <a name="5"></a>5. If you have time left

You may have some time left you can go ahead and experiment with some other functions and bindings. Feel free to discuss with other students and try to learn more about other bindings and how to trigger functions.

Some idea:
- A timer based trigger that pings a URL to see if a response is returned. 
- A webhook to trigger writing an entry in an Azure CosmosDB document store.
- A blob storage trigger to read a picture stored in a blob container that gets manipulated (e.g. watermark or size reduction) and store in another queue.
- Take one of the samples from the Azure portal when creating a new function there and convert it to .NET. This means you have to apply the correct attributes to the function.

## Wrapup
In this lab, you have created an Azure Function App in Visual Studio 2017. You implemented four functions that were triggered by HTTP requests and queue messages. You learned what attributes are required for binding to queues and blob storage.

Continue with [Lab 3 - Unit testing Azure Functions](Lab3-UnitTestingFunctions.md).

Commit message:

Added info about setting up local storage.

docs/Lab2-VS2017.md, after:

# Lab 2 - Azure Functions in Visual Studio 2017

In this lab, you will build four Azure Functions in Visual Studio 2017. The first two are triggered by HTTP requests. The next two functions will use different types of triggers and bindings to Azure storage queues and blobs. At the end, you may have time to experiment with even more functions.

Goals for this lab: 
- [Create a Function App in Visual Studio 2017](#1)
- [Executing HTTP trigger based functions](#2)
- [Binding functions to queues and blobs](#3)
- [Advanced bindings](#4)

## <a name="1"></a>1. Create a Function App in Visual Studio 2017

Open Visual Studio 2017 and create a new project for a Function App. You should have the Azure workload as part of the Visual Studio installation for the project type to appear. If it does not show up, run the Visual Studio Installer and select the Azure workload.

![File New Project](Images/FileNewProject.png)

Pick a name for your solution and project, something like ```FunctionsWorkshop2018```. Select ```Azure Functions v2 Preview (.NET Standard)``` from the drop-down and the ```Http trigger``` from the available function triggers. Leave all the rest as default.

![New Function VS2017](Images/NewFunctionVS2017.png)

Your new project will contain several items. Have a look at what is included, and how this compares to the function created in the portal. What is similar and what is different?

Change the name of the function ```Function1``` to ```DumpHeadersFunction```. Where do you need to make changes for this? Implement the function with the following code.

```
log.Info("C# HTTP trigger function processed a request.");
StringBuilder builder = new StringBuilder();
foreach (var header in req.Headers)
{
    builder.AppendFormat("{0}='{1}',", header.Key, String.Concat(header.Value));
}

return new OkObjectResult(builder.ToString());
```

Build your solution and check if it compiles correctly. Run the solution to see if it works as expected. Notice how Visual Studio starts your Function App locally using the Azure Functions Command-Line Interface (CLI) tooling.

If you see a warning in the CLI about `your worker runtime is not set` you can add the following line to the `Values` parameter in the `local.settings.json` file in your solution and retry:

```
"FUNCTIONS_WORKER_RUNTIME" : "dotnet" 
```

Navigate to the URL listed at the bottom of the console window and verify the output.

Next, click ```Show all files``` in the Solution Explorer of Visual Studio and inspect the contents of the ```bin\Debug\netstandard2.0``` folder.  

Finally, locate the ```function.json``` file for your function and look at the contents. Compare it to the JSON file from the Azure portal. Try and find the origin of the metadata inside the ```function.json``` file.


## <a name="2"></a>2. Executing HTTP trigger based functions

By using the context menu of the Function App project use `Add > New Azure Function...` to create another function of type ```Http trigger``` and name it ```HighScoreFunction```. This function will use some different features of the HTTP trigger.

Change the signature of your function to be 
```
public static async Task<IActionResult> Run(
  [HttpTrigger(AuthorizationLevel.Anonymous, "post", Route = "HighScores/player/{nickname}")] HttpRequest req,
    string nickname, // from route parameter in request URL
    ILogger log)
```
Take a moment to analyze this Run method. Notice how it is an async method and has more elaborate definition of the ```HttpTriggerAttribute```. What do the individual arguments of the attribute imply? Also, notice the ```Route``` argument and how the placeholder ```{nickname}``` matches the ```nickname``` function parameter.

Implement the body of the function with this code.
```
log.LogInformation("C# HTTP trigger function processed a request.");

// Fetching score text from body
string score = await new StreamReader(req.Body).ReadToEndAsync();

return int.TryParse(score, out int points) && !String.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(nickname) 
    ? (ActionResult)new OkObjectResult($"{nickname} achieved a score of {points}!") 
    : new BadRequestObjectResult($"Received invalid nickname and/or score!");
```

Build your solution and run it again. You should see output appear in the console window that indicates that 2 functions are running now.

Try to navigate to the new high score function. Does it work? If not, why not? What do you need to do to fix this?

You might have figured out that the browser can only perform normal GET requests from the address bar. For a POST request we need additional tooling to help you sending the proper request.

Open the Postman tool and construct a correct request you want to send. It should be an URL of this form: ```http://localhost:7071/HighScores/player/LX360``` where LX360 can be your own player name (pick a cool gamer nick if you change it). Change the HTTP verb to POST and define a body that contains a number value, e.g. 1337 or 42.
Send the request and find out if it works now. Check the console window for result or error output.

## <a name="3"></a>3. Binding functions to queues and blobs

Let's build a new function that will be triggered from a message in a storage queue, creates an QR code image based on the contents of the message and stores it in blob storage. Sounds like a lot of code will be needed? Find out quickly.

Add another function named ```QRCodeGeneratorFunction``` and pick the ```Queue trigger``` type function. Set the connection string to ```azurefunctions-queues``` and name the queue itself ```azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests```. 

Change the signature of the functions to be 
```
public static async Task Run([QueueTrigger("azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests", 
  Connection = "azurefunctions-queues")]string imageText,
  int dequeueCount,
  [Blob("azurefunctions-qrcode-images/{rand-guid}", FileAccess.ReadWrite, Connection = "azurefunctions-blobs")] CloudBlockBlob blob,
  TraceWriter log)
```
and remove the default implementation of the function.

Again, take a longer look at each of the arguments in the two attributes ```QueueTrigger``` and ```Blob```. Pay attention to the argument ```imageText```, the ```dequeueCount``` and the ```{randguid}``` token.

To generate the QR code you will use a NuGet package named ```QRCoder```. Add this package to your project.

Implement the function with this code:
```
log.Info($"C# Queue trigger function processed: {imageText}");

QRCodeGenerator generator = new QRCodeGenerator();
QRCodeData data = generator.CreateQrCode(imageText, QRCodeGenerator.ECCLevel.H);
QRCode code = new QRCode(data);

using (var stream = await blob.OpenWriteAsync())
{
    Bitmap bitmap = code.GetGraphic(20, Color.Black, Color.White, true);
    bitmap.Save(stream, ImageFormat.Png);
}

```
Notice how the azure function bindings will take care of connecting to the respective resources like the storage queue and blob storage. In order to run this locally and have the Azure Storage Emulator handle the queue and blob storage add the following lines to the `Values` property in the `local.settings.json`:

```
"azurefunctions-queues": "UseDevelopmentStorage=true",
"azurefunctions-blobs": "UseDevelopmentStorage=true"
```

Then use the Azure Storage Explorer to navigate to `(Local and Attached) -> Storage Accounts -> Development`. Add a queue named `azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests` to `Queues`. 
Finally add a blob container named `azurefunctions-qrcode-images` to `Blob Containers`.

Run the application and check that there are now three functions. You can execute the queue-triggered function by placing a message in the ```azurefunctions-qrcodes-requests``` queue. For this, start the Azure Storage Explorer and open the node on the left for ```(Local and attached) -> Storage accounts -> (Development) -> Queues```. Use the + sign to create a new message (in valid JSON) with the URL of your favorite website. Store the message and watch what happens. You might have to click Refresh and it can take up to a minute for the message to disappear.
If all went well, you should find a new guid entry in the blob storage ```azurefunctions-qrcode-images```. Open it to see if it contains your QR code. In the case that it doesn't work, use Visual Studio for debugging. The console window might also contain some logging information to help diagnose the error.

## <a name="4"></a>4. Advanced bindings

In the final example for now, you will create a function that imports the contents of a queue message. The message contains JSON content with a list of high scores. The values need to be imported into an Azure Storage table.

Create your fourth function, choose the Queue trigger type and name it ```ImportHighScoreFunction```. The connection string should be ```azurefunctions-queues``` again, but the name of the queue ```azurefunctions-import```. 

Add code to your solution for two POCO classes. The first named ```HighScoreEntry``` is used to deserialize the JSON content of the :

| Type | Property Name |
| --- | --- |
| string | Game |
| string | NickName|
| int | Score |

and

```HighScoreTableItem```:

| Type | Property Name |
| --- | --- |
| string | PartitionKey |
| string | RowKey |
| string | Nickname |
| int | Score |


Implement the function to have the following code:
```
log.Info("C# Queue trigger function processed");

foreach (HighScoreEntry entry in entries)
{
    await table.AddAsync(new HighScoreTableItem()
    {
        PartitionKey = entry.Game,
        RowKey = Guid.NewGuid().ToString(),
        Nickname = entry.Nickname,
        Score = entry.Score
    });
}
```

Try out this new function by creating a queue for the message and pasting some JSON in a message containing this data:
```
[
  {
    "Game": "Pacman",
    "Nickname": "LX360",
    "Score": 1337
  },
  {
    "Game": "Space Invaders",
    "Nickname": "MadMax",
    "Score": 123456
  },
  {
    "Game": "Donkey Kong",
    "Nickname": "Wes Copeland",
    "Score": 1218000
  }
]
```

Make sure everything works correctly and fix any errors that may occur.

## <a name="5"></a>5. If you have time left

You may have some time left you can go ahead and experiment with some other functions and bindings. Feel free to discuss with other students and try to learn more about other bindings and how to trigger functions.

Some idea:
- A timer based trigger that pings a URL to see if a response is returned. 
- A webhook to trigger writing an entry in an Azure CosmosDB document store.
- A blob storage trigger to read a picture stored in a blob container that gets manipulated (e.g. watermark or size reduction) and store in another queue.
- Take one of the samples from the Azure portal when creating a new function there and convert it to .NET. This means you have to apply the correct attributes to the function.

## Wrapup
In this lab, you have created an Azure Function App in Visual Studio 2017. You implemented four functions that were triggered by HTTP requests and queue messages. You learned what attributes are required for binding to queues and blob storage.

Continue with [Lab 3 - Unit testing Azure Functions](Lab3-UnitTestingFunctions.md).
